place let's go to Rome NBC News foreign
correspondent Matt Bradley is there
keeping in mind the numbers right now
Matt here in the United States are on
par with Rome with Italy in terms of how
this disease has progressed what's the
situation there well we just passed a
really really grim milestone we had
yesterday the largest increase in a
single day in the number of deaths here
in Italy and also we saw the largest
increase in the number of new
transmissions of new cases in one day
since this whole nationwide lockdown
started about a week ago now that's a
pretty terrible symbolic step but we're
probably gonna see another very grim
milestone today now Italy is probably
going to surpass China in the number of
deaths that have come from the
coronavirus and we'll probably hear that
in the next couple of hours we don't
know for sure but we always get the
statistics every day here in Italy at
about 6 p.m. and that's when we'll see
very likely that Italy will have
surpassed China in terms of number of
fatalities now we also heard from the
Prime Minister Conte last night he told
the Italian media that this lockdown
this unprecedented nationwide lockdown
is going to be extended past April 3rd
so that means that he probably saw those
statistics and was shocked by what is a
lag now - I just heard Joe mentioning
that lag of three weeks that's what
we're seeing here we haven't seen
despite this really really strict
lockdown there's been across the entire
country we haven't seen that coming up
in the numbers we haven't actually seen
the statistics reflect what is this
unprecedented I keep using this term
unprecedented lockdown here in Italy
because we have you know we haven't seen
the effectiveness statistics and that's
probably because a lot of the deaths
were people who got the disease before
the lockdown started but again the
transmissions are also a problem if
we're not seeing that that could be that
the lockdown isn't really having much of
an effect and that was one of those
reasons that that the Prime Minister
came out and said that he actually
chastised the public and told them they
need to comply with these orders they
need to be staying indoors and that's
why he also is going to be restrict
ting the amount of time that grocery
stores which is one thing you can still
go to here in Italy you can still go to
a grocery store you can still go to the
pharmacy those hours of operation are
going to be constricted because it seems
like the government here is very
frustrated with the lack of efficacy
from this nationwide crackdown on
walking around even though the streets
they seem pretty empty hey men Matt it's
Willie we're looking at pictures as
you're speaking of makeshift hospitals
in Italy and health care workers trying
to attend to those who are sick a lot of
Americans have been looking at Italy
over the last couple of weeks as perhaps
a preview of what's headed our way as
you say a couple of weeks ahead of us
what is the situation today inside the
hospitals we're already seeing overruns
in New York City and other big cities of
sick people yeah I mean the situation
inside the hospitals is really dire this
is one of the most advanced health
systems in the world especially in
Lombardy in the north where the vast
majority of the cases here are you know
that you can't say that this is a
backward health system it is actually
quite advanced quite wealthy and they're
still really overly stretched we heard
from doctors and nurses who've been
saying that you know they're parsing out
these ventilators they don't have enough
to go around and now they don't really
have enough hospital bed so Lombardi is
going to start Barrett has started
basically exporting cases to elsewhere
in Italy they're having to transfer
patients and here's a really McCobb sign
of the times here they're actually kind
of exporting corpses they're not able to
handle in all of the cemeteries and the
morgues the number of corpses that
they've been getting again you've solved
this massive increase in the number of
deaths so the bodies are going to have
to be moved outside of the Lombardy
region in northern Italy to elsewhere in
Italy for burial and for cremation and
that's because they just don't have the
capacity not only to handle the living
people but even the dead so Matt what do
health officials believe constitutes the
reason for the big difference between
the impact on the coronavirus in
northern Italy versus southern Italy
obviously northern Italy hit the worst
parts of southern Italy
not feeling the effects yeah well you
know there was a lag in the amount of
time in which they crack down on
people's movements in northern Italy and
that's one of the reasons why this
outbreak blossomed the way it did in
Lombardi to the extent that it even is
now surpassing the situation in China
but there was a lockdown in northern
Italy that prevented the disease from
spreading further south and that's why
here in Rome which is obviously Italy's
largest city by far there haven't really
been that many cases and so the
government has stepped in and has
restricted people's movements and so it
has been effective in the sense that
they have managed to even though this is
a really dire situation in northern
Italy they have managed to keep it from
spreading to the rest of the country
it's unclear whether or not that's gonna
stay you know the the big question for a
lot of Italians is even if we do comply
with these very very restrictive rules
is it going to be effective has the
damage already been done because you
know I've made this point before once
this disease insinuates itself it's
unclear whether or not even the most
dramatic efforts will be able to halt
the spread and that's what we're seeing
in Lombardy but so far as you mentioned
we're not seeing that in southern Italy
where the health system is much much
much weaker so that has been one benefit
of this the crackdown has geographically
restricted to spread Matt Bradley thank
you for your reporting thanks for
checking out MSNBC on YouTube and make
sure you subscribe to stay up-to-date on
the day's biggest stories and you can
click on any of the videos around us to
watch more 4 Morning Joe and MSNBC
thanks so much for watching